"Tonight on Secrets
of the Dead,"
a hunt turns deadly.
"Six million years later,
the remains shed light"
on the dawn of humanity.
"This discovery is getting
back to the common ancestor,"
to modern African
apes and ourselves.
Will these bones shatter
the current theory
of where we are from?
MAN: The classic image
of apelike creatures
gradually becoming upright
has to be thrown
in the wastebasket.
"Uncover ""The Search
for the First Human"""
on Secrets of the Dead.
Captioning sponsored by
THIRTEEN/WNET NEW YORK
Secrets of the Dead
was made possible
by contributions to
your PBS station from:
( growling )
NARRATOR: Prehistoric Africa...
a great cat preys on an
extraordinary creature.
( screaming )
( growling )
"After a fierce chase,"
an ancient prehuman animal
meets its bloody end.
( screeching )
( roaring )
"Six million years later,"
members of the Community
Museums of Kenya
"are excavating in
the Tugen Hills,"
a remote and rugged area in
the northeast of the country.
This part of Kenya
"is thought to hide many
ancient hominid remains,"
and the team hopes that
the current dig season
will bring the big find.
"Here, in a part of Africa
that's often called"
"""the cradle of humanity,"""
they are searching through six-
million-year-old layers of rock
for evidence of our
earliest ancestors.
They won't have long to wait.
"October 21, 2000..."
Kiptalam Cheboi makes
an amazing discovery.
( Cheboi speaking
local language )
TRANSLATOR: I was
walking along the ground
that was once a stream.
"As I looked closer, I saw
something that struck me."
"When I looked more
closely, I could see
they were human teeth."
"When I saw that, my whole body
was filled with excitement."
"If I had jumped for joy,
I would have hit the sky."
"NARRATOR: The fossilized
teeth amazed the team,"
for they appeared to
have many characteristics
of modern human teeth.
And other fossils soon followed.
The team had chanced
upon a cache of bones
from an ancient predator.
Leading the search were
scientists Martin Pickford
and Brigitte Senut.
"PICKFORD: When I found
it, all you could see
was the head like that."
The erosion had removed the
sediment from around it
"and I picked it up
and actually, this bit
stayed in the ground."
"Only the head came up, but I
could see this break here,"
"and see the crack, so I dug
carefully and I found this bit,"
"and then this bit was attached
and then there was a third bit,"
"and then this,
unfortunately, was missing--"
the lower end of the
femur was missing--
and that would have been
beautiful to have that
"but unfortunately,
it was not there"
and we dug all this trench to...
"looking for the rest of
it, but never got it."
"NARRATOR: What Martin
had uncovered was a
femur, or thigh bone."
"Like the teeth, it appeared
to be uncannily human."
Might the fossils
be from a hominid--
an early prehuman ancestor?
"Brigitte was searching
through the rock nearby,"
when she made another
breakthrough.
"She found a humerus,
or upper arm bone."
"I was working here,
and... in the sun."
"It was lunch time, we were
going back to the camp."
And sticking out of this area
"was a little piece
of bone, like that."
"And I picked it up,"
and it was obvious to
me from the morphology
it was piece of a humerus.
And it took me about a week to
stick all the pieces together.
"NARRATOR: Within two
weeks, the count stood
at 13 fossil fragments"
from five different individuals
of a creature new to science.
But the real headline was
that these bones seemed
to be far more ancient
than any other hominid find.
"At six million years old, they
were poised to shed light"
on the very genesis
of the human species.
"It stretches human
history way back,"
and we're seeing the opening
chapters of human origins here.
"SCHREIBER: Because the
discovery of the bones was
made in the year 2000,"
"the find was nicknamed
""Millennium Man,"""
but its scientific name
would embrace a local fable.
It has now been
christened scientifically
as Orrorin tugenensis.
"""Orrorin"" is a Tugen
word for the original man,"
and they have a legend
in their mythology
"about the original
inhabitant of this region,"
and he's called Orrorin.
"So this name was suggested
to us by the local people,"
and we thought it was
quite a pleasant name.
"Of course, ""aurore""
in French is ""dawn"","
and that also is
fairly appropriate.
"Unfortunately, ""orrore"" in
Italian means ""horror"","
which is... which
is not so good.
But Orrorin is now the
official scientific name
"for this species,
or the genus,"
and then Orrorin
tugenensis for the species.
"SCHREIBER: February, 2001."
A news conference is called to
announce the stunning discovery.
Martin and Brigitte bring
their controversial claim
"to the world's attention,
declaring that they have found"
the oldest known
prehuman ancestor.
"If they are right, the
implications are enormous."
Nothing like this
has ever been seen
in the hotly debated field
of early human evolution.
"Martin, a geologist
and paleontologist,"
has been searching for fossils
for more than 30 years.
"For him, discovering
what appears to be"
an early human ancestor
is the find of a lifetime.
PICKFORD: Being
a scientist-- and I try
and be a good scientist--
is an ongoing thing.
To make a really
big breakthrough
"obviously doesn't
happen that frequently,"
"and when it does happen,
it's quite exciting."
"SCHREIBER: Brigitte
is a specialist in
fossil morphology,"
the study of ancient
skeleton structures.
"She and Martin are based here,"
"at the French National
Museum of Natural History,"
one of the oldest museums
of its type in the world.
Their find has placed
them on the brink
of a radical and
revolutionary new theory
about how humans evolved.
"SENUT: It's not
an easy position,"
"but don't forget that
science don't proceed,"
"or don't get better,
with established ideas."
SCHREIBER: The established
idea that Martin and
Brigitte are challenging
relates to one of the great
puzzles of evolution--
"why do humans
walk on two feet,"
when almost all of our closest
relatives walk on four?
"Brian Richmond, from the
University of Illinois,"
is an expert on bipedalism.
MAN: Walking on two legs
"is a thing that defines
the human family tree,"
"not the things we
might think of,"
"like the ability to speak,
the ability to create art,"
or abstract thinking.
"In the early fossil record,"
"we don't see evidence
of those things,"
"but we do see evidence that
they're walking upright,"
so what we look for in the
earliest human origins
is evidence of this
upright walking.
"SCHREIBER: Until now, the
evidence has all pointed"
towards one theory about
how we learned to walk.
"It is the time-honored
""savanna hypothesis."""
"Ten million years ago,"
equatorial Africa was
covered with thick forest.
But then tectonic activity
in the earth's crust
caused the land in
the east to rise.
"As the land became higher,"
"rainfall in the
region was reduced,"
"and the forest
began to die out,"
eventually becoming
open savanna.
The theory goes
that upright walking
"must have appeared in
response to the open land,"
a concept embraced in one
of the most famous images
in all of science...
the ascent of man.
The poster child for
the savanna hypothesis
was a creature found in 1974.
"Her name is Lucy,
and she was found"
by paleoanthropologist
Don Johanson.
"On that November day in 1974,"
when I was on my way
back to my Land Rover--
I was heading back to camp
"because it was noontime,
it was 110, 115 degrees,"
"and I was thinking
about taking a shower,"
going for a swim in the river.
And as I looked over my shoulder
"I saw a tiny, little
piece of arm bone"
that was the first signal
"that there was something unique
here, something different."
"And as I kneeled down to
look at it and pick it up,"
"my graduate student said,"
"""What makes you think it's
from a human ancestor?"""
"And I said, ""I think it goes
with those pieces of skull"
"next to your hand."""
"And as we looked
up this slope,"
"we could see, glistening
in that noonday sun,"
"pieces of ribs,
pieces of a pelvis,"
"parts of an arm,
bits of a leg,"
"a piece of a jaw, and all
of a sudden it clicked."
"Here was an associated
specimen, an associated
skeleton,"
more than three
million years old.
This was going to turn
out to be important.
I think what made
Lucy so special
was a combination
of her antiquity--
the fact that she was
3.2 million years old--
that she was roughly
40% complete...
"The combination of a skeleton
that old, that complete,"
caught everybody's attention
in anthropological circles.
"I mean, she became
an instant hit."
SCHREIBER: Lucy's age was
staggering at the time--
3.2 million years old.
"Time, on such a large scale,
is hard to comprehend,"
but it is possible to put
into a human perspective.
Take a single modern human
and place a parent behind him
"and then a parent
behind that, and so on."
"Generation after generation
stretches into the past,"
forming a line of
spectacular proportions.
"The first of our kind,
modern Homo sapiens,"
"are 100,000 years old,"
and first appear about
three miles down this line.
To find a species
like Homo habilis--
which lived more than
two million years ago--
requires a 60-mile
journey back in time.
"Traveling even further back
into our ancestral past,"
there are fewer and
fewer landmarks.
"96 miles down the line and 3.2
million years into prehistory,"
we eventually find... Lucy.
What made Lucy so important
"is the fact that her skeleton
clearly shows she was a biped,"
that she walked on two feet.
"Because of her age and her
bipedalism, Lucy fit perfectly"
into the established picture
of bipedal evolution--
an upright-walking ancestor
"that lived around 3.2
million years ago,"
"at the time of the
expanding savanna,"
well after the deforestation
of East Africa had begun.
"But now that theory, and
Lucy's place within it,"
are being challenged.
"For if Orrorin really is a
six-million-year-old hominid,"
"we will be taken deeper
into the past than ever,"
"to a time when the
conventional wisdom has
not even been tested,"
let alone applied.
JOHANSON: This is
a period of time
from which we have
three or four fossils
that you could fit into
the palm of your hand.
And anything that would be
found in this time period
"of five, six million
years, has to be important."
"SHREIBER: The bones'
lasting significance
will depend, however,"
"not just on their age,"
but on where they are placed on
the human evolutionary tree.
PICKFORD: We're really dealing
with an infinitesimally small--
and we hope representative--
part of the fossil record
and trying to draw out
details about human evolution
from those few remains.
"SHREIBER: It is
a daunting task,"
for although there is
only one surviving species
"of humans today,"
"our evolution was
a convoluted one,"
for evolution is
about populations--
"populations that sometimes
split to form new species,"
"and other times, die off
in evolutionary dead ends."
Determining any single
fossil's place in this chaos
is an immense challenge.
"For a long time,
anthropologists have, uh..."
"speculated that the
recent ancestor,"
"or the common ancestor, to
both the living African apes"
and those branches that
evolved into hominids
was to be found somewhere
between six and ten million
years ago in Africa.
SHREIBER: The map
of human evolution is
constantly being redrawn
as new discoveries fill
in holes in the record.
But scientists generally agree
that hominids split from apes
over six million years ago.
Was Orrorin present
when the split occurred?
Martin and Brigitte believe
that Orrorin really is a
six-million-year-old hominid
and that it has the
potential to revolutionize
our understanding
of human evolution.
But are they jumping the gun?
Are the bones really
as old as they believe?
PICKFORD: We can't
actually date the fossils
"directly themselves,"
but what we can do is date the
strata in which they occur
and then extrapolate
that date to the fossil.
SHREIBER: The geology
of this region helps.
"The area is known as
the Lukeino formation,"
an ancient lake basin
formed by a giant lava flow
that poured from one of
the massive volcanoes
scattered across Eastern Africa.
PICKFORD: That
lava flow is huge.
It extends for 50 or 60
kilometers north/south
"and about 60, 70
kilometers east/west."
And it formed the floor
of this lake basin
where these sediments-- the
Lukeino formation-- accumulated.
SHREIBER: This bottom layer
of lava is called trachite.
The sediment containing
Orrorin's bones
collected above it.
Then a second flow
of basalt lava
created the icing on the
geological layer cake.
"Both lava layers can be dated,"
so the bones found in
the middle can be placed
within a well-defined
slice of prehistoric time.
So we're basically
in a kind of sandwich
with trachite dated at
6.2 million years below
and these basalt lavas at
5.65 covering the sediments.
SHREIBER: So Orrorin lies
somewhere in between.
To try and get a more exact date
"for the top and
bottom layers of lava,"
the team calls in a
group of scientists
from the University
of Shimane in Japan.
The scientists will use
the shifting properties of
the earth's magnetic field
to determine the
date of the lava
that lies above
and below Orrorin.
"When this rock was
in its molten state,"
tiny magnetic crystals
formed within it.
"As the lava cooled, the
crystals all came to rest"
pointing in the same direction
"along the earth's
magnetic field,"
just like the
needle of a compass.
"Every few thousand
years, however,"
the earth's magnetic
poles reverse.
"When this happens,"
a compass needle would point
in the opposite direction.
The crystals in the
corresponding layers of rock
do the same.
These different layers--
each with its own
crystalline fingerprint--
can be sequenced and turned
into a geological timeline.
The results are encouraging.
The rocks in which
Orrorin was found
are between 5.8 and
6.1 million years old.
"But even though the rock
samples have been firmly dated,"
there is still a small chance
that the bones may not be from
the same period as the rock.
"PICKFORD: I actually
had nightmares for the
next... about two weeks,"
"thinking, you know, are
these things really as old"
as six million years?
"There has been histories
of discoveries,"
"in Kenya in particular, but
elsewhere in the world,"
"where the discoverers claimed
they were very ancient,"
and they turned out
to be much younger.
"SHREIBER: Because the site
is a dried up watercourse,"
it is possible that the bones
had simply washed there
out of much younger rocks.
This would put the value
of the find in jeopardy.
The specter of displaced bones
"is one that haunts
all fossil hunters,"
but there is a way
to be almost certain
that the fossils do come
from the sediments in
which they were found.
The team looks at
the huge variety
of other fossilized creatures
that accompanied
Orrorin's remains.
( conversing in French )
"PICKFORD: In the
Lukeino formation where
we found Orrorin,"
"we also found other mammals
such as elephants, horses,"
"hippopotamus, pigs and so on."
"And by the evolutionary
stage of those creatures,
those fossils,"
we can also guess the age.
"And as soon as
we found Orrorin,"
"we looked around and
found other fossils,"
"and we could say
straight away,"
"yeah, this is late
Miocene in age,"
so it's got to be around
about six million years.
SCHREIBER: Because
the fossilized remains
of ancient animals
have already been
accurately dated
"to six million years
old at other sites,"
their presence alongside
Orrorin is further confirmation
that Orrorin is from
the same period.
"In addition, all the fossils,
including Orrorin's,"
"are encrusted with a coating
derived from freshwater algae,"
indicating that they
are from the same site.
There is now little doubt
"about the date of the bones
Martin and Brigitte have found,"
little doubt that they are in
fact six million years old.
PICKFORD: You're
seeing a picture which
nobody ever saw before.
"Previously, the oldest
known hominid was"
"about 4.2, and now
we're at six million."
This discovery is
very significant
in terms of its chronology
because it is
getting back in time
very close to that period
when we think there
was a common ancestor
to the modern African
apes and ourselves.
"SCHREIBER: So what
was this six-million-
year-old creature like,"
"and more importantly,"
how can we be sure it
really was an early hominid?
The accepted wisdom is
"that bipedalism is
the defining factor of
early human evolution,"
so Martin and Brigitte
will need to show
that Orrorin really
did walk upright.
Doing so would not only suggest
that Orrorin is our
earliest known ancestor;
it would also indicate that
upright walking itself
is far older than scientists
had previously realized.
Making the claim that any animal
this age was walking upright
is an incredibly
important conclusion
for paleoanthropology.
It's a very important issue.
So we'd like to have
the entire skeleton
or at least a good
portion of the lower limb
to be able to... to
make this conclusion.
"Unfortunately, for
the Orrorin remains,"
we don't have the knee joint.
SCHREIBER: The lack of the
knee joint is a setback
because the knee is
the easiest way to tell
if an animal walked
on two legs or four.
"Because humans walk upright,
our knees are specially adapted"
to give us a smooth
and efficient stride.
"Apes, on the other hand,
have their knees far apart,"
and this difference shows up
in the shapes of the bones.
"If you imagine a human
standing there like I am now,"
you've got your body weight
coming down onto your hips.
It's going down
into your thighbones
"which are angled into the
knee bone, the knee joint,"
and then straight
down to the floor.
And this is important because
it makes for smooth walking.
"Rather than walking
like a chimp with a lot
of lateral movement,"
a human can walk with almost
no movement of his hips.
So you've got the whole of
your body weight coming down
through two joints into the
knees and straight down.
"And for that to happen,"
the thighbones have to
be angled in humans.
SCHREIBER: This angle is seen
when the knee joint is
placed on a flat surface.
"If the bone leans outwards,
like this human bone does,"
the animal is certain to
have walked on two feet.
"But with the knee missing,"
this crucial test cannot
be applied to Orrorin.
The team will have to
look elsewhere for clues.
RICHMOND: Bone is very
much a living tissue.
It's very dynamic.
"So in a bone, there's
a little bit of history"
of the activity of what
happened in that animal.
And that's what we'd like
to get at eventually is
to look inside these
bones for clues
as to how these
bones were loaded
when the animal was alive.
SCHREIBER: One particular detail
on the surface of the thighbone
provides just such an insight.
"SENUT: This is a
femur of Orrorin,"
"and there is one
feature which has been
linked with bipedalism,"
"is this groove here,
very well marked,"
for one of the ligaments
of one of the muscles
which helps to keep
the leg towards...
bring the legs towards the body.
SCHREIBER: This muscle runs
from the back of the thighbone
and connects to the
front of the pelvis.
"In a four-legged animal,
it has a straight path,"
"but in a biped, the
joint is extended"
so that the muscle
becomes stretched
"and is wrapped around
the neck of the femur,"
creating a groove in the bone.
"JOHANSON: If that groove is
present as it is in Orrorin,"
there is a suggestion there
that the hip acted in a way
"very similar to our
own, meaning that this
creature was bipedal."
The groove is a sign
"that Orrorin might
have walked upright,"
but alone it is not enough.
"Other primates,
such as gorillas,"
can also have this groove.
So more convincing proof of
bipedalism must be found.
"Fortunately, modern medical
technology can examine"
parts of the six-million-
year-old bones
that are invisible
to the human eye.
"Since we bear our
weight on the hip joint,"
"that weight causes
the neck to bend down,"
creating stress on the top
and the bottom of the neck.
"But there's also a muscle that
pulls on this bone right here,"
"and that reduces the
stress at the top,"
but adds more stress
at the bottom.
"SCHREIBER: In a
bipedal animal,"
the underside of the
neck becomes thicker
to support the extra weight.
It is this hidden feature that
can provide the critical answer
to how Orrorin walked.
So if Orrorin has thick
bone on the bottom
"and thin bone on the top,"
then it would provide
really good evidence
that this thing
walked on two legs.
That inside of the bone
and that pattern tells us
what the animal was actually
doing with its limbs
while it was alive.
"Now, we can't see that
with the fossil itself."
We'll to have see X
rays or C.T. scans
of the inside of the
neck to be able to tell.
"SCHREIBER: The fossils
are brought to a hospital
in Toulouse, France."
"Here, a C.T., or Computer
Tomography scanner--"
a device normally used
to diagnose illness
in living people--
will produce a
three-dimensional image
that shows the ancient
bone's hidden structure.
These are consecutive slices
through the top of
the fossilized bone.
"First they show the
ball-like head of the femur,"
which appears as a circle.
"Then as they descend
into the neck,"
the amazing level of detail
in this ancient thighbone
becomes apparent.
Every hollow and ridge
is clearly visible.
"The computer builds a
three-dimensional model,"
which can then be
sectioned off to reveal
the thickness of the bone
in the critical neck area.
"At last, the vital
evidence has been found:"
thicker bone on the
underside of the neck--
there to support the
weight of an early hominid
as it walked on two feet.
PICKFORD: Orrorin is something
apart from the apes.
"Walking, running,
standing was a major part"
"of the repertoire of this
animal or this creature,"
and it shows in the bones.
"It was adapted for
that kind of behavior,"
and it shows that
adaptation in its bones.
SCHREIBER: The discovery proves
"that bipedalism
is much older than has
generally been thought,"
for the accepted wisdom claimed
that our ability to walk
upright only evolved
around the time that Lucy's kind
walked on the open savanna.
"But if bipedalism occurred
before the forests receded,"
what could have compelled our
earliest ancestors to stand up?
"What drove us to begin
to walk on two feet,"
rather than on the four
we had been using as apes
for millions of years?
The reason for the
emergence of bipedalism
is one of the great
mysteries of human evolution.
RICHMOND: B pedalism
is a very rare thing
"to see in mammals, even
in animals as a whole."
"We know birds
walk on two legs,"
but there's a very
compelling reason:
"They have wings, and
their upper limbs, then,"
are so specialized that
they can't use those limbs
"for weight support, so
they walk on two legs."
"If humans had wings,"
"then we would have the answer
right there, but we don't."
So there must be some other
very compelling reason
for humans to have begun
walking on two legs.
"SCHREIBER: So, why did
our earliest ancestors
become bipedal?"
What advantages could
bipedalism have granted
to an evolving species?
Marc Raibert is an
expert in robotics.
He believes we can gain much
insight into animal locomotion
by analyzing the
way his robots move.
RAIBERT: We're very interested
"in the relationship between the
robots we build and biology,"
"how people and animals
work when they locomote,"
and the relationship between
those has two parts.
There's what looking at the
knowledge about animals tells us
"when we're trying
to design robots,"
but there's also an opportunity
to use what we learn
about building robots
to help in understanding how
people and animals work.
"SCHREIBER: Based at
MIT, Marc has built"
some of the most extraordinary
striding robots ever seen.
They come in all
shapes and sizes.
His experiments help illustrate
what advantages a
two-legged creature has
over a four-legged one.
RAIBERT: One of the
things we found out is
that it was much easier
to build a robot with fewer
legs than with more legs.
So a biped was much easier
to develop and to make work
"than a quadruped,"
largely because the complexity
of coordinating the legs
"was reduced, the mechanical
complexity was reduced"
by not having all the additional
mechanisms and actuators.
SCHREIBER: Just as a bipedal
robot is more efficient
"than a robot with four legs,"
a two-legged animal is in
many ways more efficient
than a four-legged one.
"With fewer limbs to control,"
"a biped can transport
itself successfully,"
yet use less of its body
to achieve the task.
It can use its natural
instability to its advantage
when moving.
Bipeds are highly maneuverable
and extremely agile.
"But perhaps most importantly,"
walking on two legs
liberates the other limbs
and frees up the
hands for other uses.
Raibert's robots demonstrate
"efficiency, flexibility
and maneuverability--"
all advantages that
an ape would possess
if it became bipedal.
But doing so would
have been no easy task.
"In order to reap the
benefits of upright walking,"
an exceptional sense of balance
would have become vital.
"RAIBERT: In order
to achieve that, you have
to have a control system"
that can maintain its balance
"when just two feet
are on the ground,"
"or one foot is on the ground,"
"and when it's running, when
no feet are on the ground,"
and so that's a big challenge.
SCHREIBER: Learning to balance
and walk upright would have been
immensely difficult for
our earliest ancestors.
It is a process that has
never been fully explained
by the savanna hypothesis.
Anatomist Robin
Crompton has been trying
to come up with a
viable explanation.
He has been using computers
to try and determine
how the shift occurred.
There's been a
long-running debate
between two different groups
who are analyzing exactly
the same fossil remains
"but in two very different and,
up to now, incompatible ways."
SCHREIBER: One group held
that early hominids
would have walked upright
"in an erect,
straight position."
Others claimed our ancestors
would first have moved
"with a slouching,
bent-knee, bent-hip gait."
CROMPTON: We made a computer
model based on our information
from the literature and
from other scientists
and gave them body builds
of different kinds of apes.
SCHREIBER: Robin tested
the two walking styles:
"upright and erect
like modern humans,"
then the bent-knee walk.
CROMPTON: What we
did discover is that the
mechanical energy cost--
"that is, the work that
the muscles must do"
to sustain the motion-- was
approximately twice as high
"in the model which is walking
in a bent-knee, bent-hip gait."
SCHREIBER: The inefficiency of
the bent-knee gait raises doubts
about whether or not it
ever actually occurred
in early hominids.
Perhaps there is a
better explanation
for our evolution
from four legs to two.
Robin believes that one creature
alive today may hold the answer.
It is one of the rarest
animals in the world...
the orangutan.
"CROMPTON: For us the orangutan
is a fascinating animal,"
"not only attractive but
scientifically fascinating,"
"because it may, of
all the great apes, be"
our best model for the
origins of bipedality.
"SCHREIBER: The name
""orangutan"" means ""forest
man"" in Indonesia,"
and while they don't
come from Africa
"and they are not our
closest living relatives,"
they do display
behavior and adaptations
that may hint at how we
developed bipedalism.
"Here at Chester Zoo
in the United Kingdom,"
Robin had been using special
high-speed video cameras
"to film these animals'
unique way of walking,"
"which, unlike chimpanzees', is
remarkably similar to ours."
CROMPTON: The hip
joint is very extended;
"that is, the leg
goes behind the body,"
and you won't see a
chimpanzee do that.
And this is linked
to their behavior
in the high levels
of the forest canopy
"gathering... gathering
fruit and moving
on fairly small vines,"
and using their
body rather like...
almost like a spider
"to reach out for branches,
to reach out for food."
"SCHREIBER: In the wild,"
"these animals hardly ever
come down to the ground,"
preferring to spend
almost all their time
200 feet up in
the forest canopy.
Yet they often support
almost all their weight
"on their hind legs,"
and their habitat supplies them
with the perfect environment
in which to develop an
acute sense of balance.
CROMPTON: The trees are
perhaps the ideal nursery
"for the evolution
of human walking,"
because they enable an
animal to balance itself.
They can reach out
in any direction.
"Everywhere-- below them, above
them, to the side of them--"
they'll find branches
which they can touch.
"For me, then, the evidence
is increasingly strong"
"that bipedalism did not
arise on the ground,"
but arose in the trees.
PICKFORD: A creature that
is basically arboreal
that needs to cross from patch
of trees to patch of trees--
"if they're bipedal,
they have an advantage."
They don't have to change
their body too much.
"They come down to the ground,"
"their bodies are
already upright from
being in the trees,"
"they cross the ground upright,"
and they climb up the next
patch of trees to get food.
They don't have to modify
their body too much.
"SCHREIBER: The evidence
is beginning to add up,"
and Robin's research seems
to cast further doubt
on the belief that
bipedalism only evolved
after the emergence
of the open savanna.
"Instead, the orangutans,
the robots and now Orrorin"
are pointing towards a
much earlier transition
to upright walking in
a more wooded setting.
The discovery of Orrorin's
bones is forcing us
to reexamine our understanding
"of when, why and how upright
walking first occurred."
Our perceptions are being
turned on their head.
"JOHANSON: One thing
that's emerging now,"
"and Orrorin, the discovery of
Orrorin really reinforces this,"
is the idea that
bipedalism is an adaptation
that arose in a more
forested environment
and was a pre-adaptation
in many ways
to when they did move out
onto the savanna grasslands.
"SCHREIBER: So if bipedalism
really did emerge in the trees,"
the iconic image
of human evolution
may need some revision.
PICKFORD: The sort
of classic image
"of quadrupedal
apelike creatures,"
"such as a chimp, for example,
gradually becoming upright,"
going through all the
stages of tottering
and up to become fully upright--
I think that's... has to be
thrown in the wastebasket.
"I may be wrong, but I susp..."
I really think that
idea should be removed
from the list of hypotheses
about hominid origins.
"SCHREIBER: Rather than the
typical portrayal of evolution,"
this would be a more
accurate picture.
Our ancestors have been upright
for at least six million years.
"But in order to be sure that
the new picture is correct,"
Martin and Brigitte
must have proof
that the area where Orrorin
was found really was wooded
six million years ago.
"Once again, their confirmation
comes from the large number"
of other fossils that have
been excavated at the site.
Most were from animals that
lived in or near a forest.
"Monkeys and small antelope
were particularly common,"
and there was plenty of water.
"PICKFORD: You've got
lots of impala, and quite
a lot of colobus monkeys."
"SENUT: Mind you, we've got a
lot of hippos as well, huh?"
"PICKFORD: Well, there's hippos"
and there's crocs and snails--
there's freshwater snails here.
SCHREIBER: The remains
paint a picture
of a region that was at
least partially forested.
But what evidence is there
of Orrorin's place
within this ecosystem?
How did this early hominid split
its time between the trees
and the ground?
"Back in Paris, Martin
and Brigitte can infer"
quite a few details from the
bones they have collected.
"It's about the size of
a chimp, a modern chimp,"
but its legs were probably
longer than a chimp's legs.
"If you see one walking around
or in this environment,"
"you wouldn't have
said, ""Ah, there's a
man,"" or ""a woman."""
"You'd have said,
""There's something"
"a little bit like a human, but
not really like a modern one."""
SCHREIBER: Creating an overall
picture of an extinct animal
is an immense challenge.
But there are many
characteristics
that can be deduced.
"The teeth are an
excellent starting point,"
for they reveal
vital information
about a creature's
life and diet.
"Gary Schwartz, from
Georgetown University,"
is an expert on ancient teeth.
SCHWARTZ: One of the really
interesting things about teeth
is that they are the only
part of the skeletal system
that comes into contact with the
outside world on a daily basis.
Now what's interesting
about the Orrorin find
is the back teeth
tend to have features
"that seem to resemble the
modern human condition,"
while the front teeth
tend to have features
which resemble
modern chimpanzees.
( chimp screaming )
"SCHREIBER: In a
six-million-year-old animal,"
"scientists would expect all
the teeth to be apelike,"
but Orrorin's back teeth are
surprisingly similar to our own.
( X ray beam sizzles )
"The C.A.T. scan shows that,
just like ours, they are small,"
and have a thick
layer of enamel--
the tough outer coating.
The shape of teeth
tells you a lot
about the food that that
particular animal is eating.
An animal that
eats mostly leaves
"tends to have teeth that
are very sharp and crested,"
and those sharp crests
tend to slice through
the tough leafy material.
"On the other hand,"
"animals that eat lots of
tough, hard nuts and seeds"
have low flat teeth
which are used
to pulverize and...
and crush those seeds.
"SCHREIBER: Orrorin's teeth are
of this low, pulverizing type,"
"and so, like us, it was
probably an omnivore,"
"eating nuts, berries,
fruit and insects."
"Given the similarity
to human teeth,"
it might have also eaten meat.
( grunts )
SCHREIBER: But what other
behaviors did Orrorin exhibit?
"JOHANSON: These discoveries of
Orrorin are... are very fresh,"
they're very recent.
We don't know much about
the.... the broader picture
"in terms of how they lived, and
how they made their living,"
but I suspect that they
weren't solitary creatures.
I suspect that they lived
in some sort of a group--
"probably in multimale,
multifemale groups."
SCHREIBER: The likelihood that
they lived in mixed-sex groups
comes from the study
of our modern cousins.
Virtually every living primate
"displays a similar sort
of social behavior,"
and researchers are only
just beginning to understand
the complex societies
formed by the higher apes.
"But with communal living so
prevalent in modern primates,"
it stands to reason that the
development of the behavior
is not recent.
"Orrorin was almost
certainly a social beast,"
even if it had yet to
develop in other ways.
"JOHANSON : This is
certainly a long, long time"
"before the manufacture
of stone tools,"
which don't really appear
in the archaeological record
until about 2.5
million years ago.
So these... these are prestone
toolmakers by a... a long shot.
"SCHREIBER: Although
they did not use tools,
there is evidence"
that Orrorin was well adapted
for movement in the trees.
"This humerus, or arm
bone, shows that Orrorin
was a good climber."
The large flare at its lower end
provides the attachment for
the powerful arm muscles
that a tree-dwelling
animal needs.
And the finger bone is curved--
"a feature that all
modern apes share,"
because permanently curved hands
are better for holding
on to branches.
JOHANSON: I suspect it might not
have been unreasonable to think
that they may have made nests
and slept in the trees.
"Chimpanzees certainly do that,
and being off the ground"
would have added an
additional element of safety.
SCHREIBER: But even
this precaution
would not have put
Orrorin out of danger.
"There is evidence that fierce
predators were on the prowl,"
and often successful.
"These shallow depressions
are tooth marks,"
probably from an ancient
species of big cat.
( growling )
PICKFORD: It looks as
though the Orrorin fell prey
to some carnivore on a
reasonably regular basis.
We found the finger bones
of a large carnivore
which are slightly
larger than a leopard.
"And then we found...
one of the teeth,"
"one of the... the
carnassial tooth,"
which is the razorlike tooth
that is used for shearing flesh.
( squeals )
( growls )
PICKFORD: A carnivore like a
leopard would fit the bill
"because it's not only preying
on ground animals like impalas,"
"but it's also getting Colobus
monkeys from the trees,"
and maybe Orrorin from the
trees or from the ground.
( hominid screams )
( roaring )
"BICKFORD: Then bringing
them to a central place,"
"maybe to its favorite tree
where it stores its prey up,"
"hanging the prey
up in the trees,"
and that's why there's
such a concentration there.
( thunder cracks )
"SCHREIBER: By gathering
its prey to one location,"
the ancient predator
unwittingly provided us
with the remains of
a prehuman ancestor.
"And also with clues
about how, when and where"
this bipedal creature
evolved from the apes.
The evidence is compelling.
Orrorin moved and lived both
on the ground and in the trees
six million years ago.
Yet Martin and Brigitte
have an even bolder claim.
They believe that Orrorin is
actually more similar to humans
than Don Johanson's
famous find--
that Orrorin is more directly
related to us than Lucy is.
"Although there is disagreement
among the experts,"
some believe that
more than one species
"of early humans existed
simultaneously,"
much like Neanderthals and
modern humans did more recently.
Ian Tattersall has
spent much of his life
studying the diversity
of early hominids.
Traditionally we have
envisaged evolution
"as a sort of linear
process, a gradual process"
of modification of single
lineages of organisms
over long periods of time.
Now we realize that the process
"actually is much more
complex than this,"
and it very much involves the
production of new species;
that is to say new
reproductive entities
which can be formed in
relatively short periods of time
and which will then
compete with each other.
SCHREIBER: Martin and
Brigitte believe this
was exactly the case
"when Lucy was alive, and
that it was not her species,"
but rather a
descendant of Orrorin's
that gave rise to modern humans.
They turn to a comparison of
the bones for verification.
"This is a mandible of a modern
human, and as you can see"
"from the third molar, second
molar and the first molar,"
the teeth are small and square.
Now if we compare
"the modern human mandible
and Lucy's mandible,"
it's obvious that she is
bigger in terms of teeth--
and she's a young adult--
and the teeth are
more elongated.
"It's interesting to
see that Orrorin,"
by the morphology
of its teeth...
the teeth are closer to humans.
"If I want to compare Orrorin
with Lucy, we can clearly see"
"that the teeth in Orrorin
are small and square,"
"and Lucy's are more
elongated, more rectangular."
When we compare
Lucy with Orrorin
there's other landmarks
which tells us
that Lucy was not the
same biped as Orrorin.
SCHREIBER: The other
main landmark is the
shape of the two femurs.
The short neck and
head of Orrorin's
appears to be more similar to a
human femur than Lucy's does.
The problem would be
that you would have to go
"from small humanlike molars
to large Lucy-like molars,"
back to small humanlike molars.
"So, you're getting a kind
of zigzag in the evolution."
You'd have to do the
same with the leg bones--
"more humanlike leg
bones in Orrorin,"
"less humanlike in Lucy,
back to humanlike in humans."
"And you're getting a kind of
yo-yo effect in evolution,"
"and we don't like that,
generally speaking."
"It's not impossible, but if you
have it not only in the teeth"
"but also in the leg bones,"
then you're getting two yo-yos--
makes it very unlikely.
You would certainly prefer
that in creating a
scheme of evolution
for a group such as the hominids
that you didn't
have to backtrack
more times than necessary.
It doesn't mean that no
backtracking ever occurred.
SCHREIBER: But Martin and
Brigitte are confident
with their claim
that Lucy's kind became extinct.
Lucy may well be
on a side branch.
She's definitely hominid in
the sense of being a biped.
She's part of this bushiness
that we're talking about--
the family tree being bushy--
"but I'm afraid that her kind
eventually became extinct,"
whereas the Orrorin type of
morphology carried on through
and eventually gave
rise to modern humans.
That's what I think it means.
Whether I'm right or not is...
( chuckling ): we'll only
find out in the future.
"SCHREIBER: Until the fossil
record is more complete,"
scientists will
continue to debate
whether Lucy and her kind
"gave rise to every
one of us alive today,"
or whether she was from an
unfortunate side branch
that eventually died out.
As for Orrorin...
"Hey, Brigitte, regarde."
"SCHREIBER: The team continues
to search for more bones,"
hoping to come up with as
much of a complete skeleton
as possible.
( laughter )
( all speaking local language )
SCHREIBER: For only
with more evidence
can Martin and Brigitte
conclusively put to rest
all reservations about
Orrorin's true place
at the very base of the
human evolutionary tree.
"As time goes by, we will learn
more about the remarkable set"
of geological and
evolutionary coincidences
that set this ancient creature
on the long road to humanity.
"But for now, we have been
given a first glimpse"
of our most distant past.
Dig deeper into the origins
of humanity at PBS Online.
"For chats with experts,
interactive features and more,"
log on to pbs.org.